# Designing for Services Beyond the Screen

The producer-consumer model is so ingrained in our society that we tend to treat
everything like a product—a one-and-done offering that can be pushed to the
market and forgotten.

Online experiences are rarely so simple.

Imagine taking a flight from London to New York: you book a ticket on the
airline’s website, use an online check-in and ticketing system, interact with
gate staff and other passengers, and deal with third-party airport services like
ground transport and security. Suddenly, that plane ticket isn’t just a purchase
online, but an ongoing service experience—and one where a hundred things could
go wrong at any step along the way.

Let’s say a family has to check in at the airport instead of online because the
web system wasn’t able to handle a seat booking for an infant. This seems like a
small, one-off issue, but aggregated with other “small” problems, the stress
induced when traveling long-haul with a young family becomes enormous—big enough
that they may never fly that airline again.

You might be brought in by the marketing department to redesign the website for
this airline, but who is designing the check-in machines, the CRM systems used
by call center staff, the print materials, or the policies the cabin crew must
adhere to?

Are you thinking through these broader service contexts? You should be. Because
even if your “job” ends at the design for a specific channel, your users’
experiences don’t. Your website or mobile app might be wonderful on its own, but
customers experience services in totality, and base their judgments on how well
everything works together. This means the transitions between channels and over
time become crucial.

When no one is designing the rest *and* taking care of how it all connects
together, then there is a danger that many parts of the service experience will
“just happen.” If we care about our users as much as we say we do, this isn’t
good enough.

![Table1][Single-Channel Thinking]

*Single-Channel Thinking*

![Table2][A Multichannel Experience]

*A Multichannel Experience*

## Services aren’t assembly line products

How do you know the quality of a product? You can pick up an iPhone, inspect the
stitching on a suit, or test drive a Mercedes. But services are often
intangible. You cannot hold your bank or cell phone accounts in your hand. These
accounts grant you access to infrastructure, such as the ubiquitous “cloud” or
the bank’s ATM network, much of which you only ever see a tiny amount of. This
makes it hard for potential customers to evaluate quality.

Many critical services, such as insurance and healthcare, are long-term
investments in a possible future scenario. In these cases, the customer does not
even discover the quality of the service until long after they have paid for it,
and often at the very worst moment—when disaster strikes.

Services are not totally intangible, of course. A customer might not be able to
hold her bank account in her hand, but she will interact with many parts of the
service. The ATM card, online banking website, smartphone app, branches, staff,
marketing material, and tedious security shenanigans are all tangible
touchpoints of the service.

Somebody has to design all of those touchpoints, and you’ve probably even
designed a few of them yourself. But often they are not designed as a coherent
whole. Instead, each touchpoint channel is the domain of a different silo within
an organization.

![silos][Many business are arranged in silos]

*Many business are arranged in silos.*

Dividing businesses into silos, with each silo reporting back to management,
worked well for industrial product companies: on an assembly line, each worker
works on building the same object, such as a car, that never changes its planned
final form over the course of assembly. Each task is repeatable and requires
little or no interaction with other people—so much so that factory workers can
be replaced by robots.

But services aren’t made on an assembly line. They are complex and difficult to
get right, because your users might interact with the service across a wide
array of touchpoints. You can’t predict precisely which of them each user will
need, in what order she will encounter them, and who will help her along the
way. The service is experienced differently by every person, because every
person is different.

![ecologies][Services are ecologies]

*Services are ecologies.*

Many of these channels also involve interactions between people. Although
branding folk like to speak of products having personalities, your car does not
wake up with a hangover, and your iPhone does not hate its boss and act surly
with its user all day.

In contrast, your interaction with someone in your insurance company’s call
center is the value of the service, and interpersonal interactions are messy and
unpredictable. Relationships do not break down into manageable silos and units
in the same way as products. This meaircans designing with people and not just
for them. The back-end systems and services that staff use are just as important
as the customer-facing ones.

If each channel is also owned and managed by a different organizational silo, it
is very difficult to deliver a coherent customer experience—because the people
working on the various parts of the project make decisions without understanding
their implications outside their group. Or, the decision falls between
departmental domains and no one makes them.

Either way, a crack in the customer experience appears.

## Time and place affect service

Service experiences are also very much affected by when and where they happen.
The most amazing thing delivered at the wrong time can be more frustrating than
something average delivered at exactly the right moment.

Think of a couple arguing in a restaurant when the violinist turns up to
serenade them, or a helpful nurse arriving with a meal just after a loved one
has died in a hospital room (something I once experienced). As with a great deal
of design, some of the best service experiences are like the ideal waiter—there
to fill your glass when needed, but somehow invisible when not.

The key to a seamless service experience is taking care to understand the
contexts in which users interact with touchpoints and services and how they
transition between them.

After a recent upgrade of the Deutsche Bahn train ticket machines in Germany,
for example, the graphic design of the screens is more pleasant, but the overall
interaction flow is much slower. The interface feels like that of a website, but
in the context of rushing for a train, its time-consuming, tab-by-tab sequencing
is totally frustrating.

![ticket machine][Sequenced tabs make for slow going with the new Deutsche Bahn ticket machines]

*Sequenced tabs make for slow going with the new Deutsche Bahn ticket machines.*

The other context is the maintenance of the machines themselves, usually carried
out by third-party contractors. Even when it is clear to the designers and
researchers that the ticket machines are a problem, the company supplying and
maintaining those machines usually resists changes, citing IT support issues. On
one project I know of, the only things the design team was allowed to change
were the graphics; they were not even allowed to touch the layout of the
buttons, despite research evidence showing that this was a source of confusion
for customers.

Something as small as a change in an organization’s policy, third-party partner
agreement, or even a [single UI element][1] can have large ripple effects that
always relate back to real people with real emotions.

Think of service interactions in terms [similar to any other relationship][2].
An individual’s lack of basic personal hygiene or punctuality is not a big deal
in the grand scheme of things, but it does reveal how much that person cares
about the people he interacts with.

The same goes for services. All the small glitches—delivering letters to the
wrong address, billing errors, customers having to repeat details multiple
times—damage people’s trust in a company. They make people wonder whether
similar chaos is going on behind the scenes. If the airline’s web systems don’t
work, how well does it maintain its aircraft? Fixing the small glitches can have
a big impact on the level of trust and the overall experience.

## Start designing beyond the screen

Experiences are not bound by media channels. Designing for complex services is
both an opportunity and a challenge for web and mobile designers.

We say we’re great at empathy for users, but designers are not so good at
turning that lens onto their clients. We often see our role as protecting the
end user from corporate short-sightedness. Why don’t we also ask, “So, turning
around a company with 5,000 employees must be difficult. Would you tell us about
it?”

The same methods and attention we use to advocate for users can extend into the
structure of the organizations delivering those services and beyond. Think of it
as UX for the entire organization.

Designers also excel at making the intangible tangible, and are well suited to
visualizing and communicating the interdependencies of a system to others. We
can do this for service ecosystems as well as we can for website architectures
by creating artifacts like [service blueprints][3], [customer-journey maps][4],
[storyboards][5], and [prototypes][6]. These all help those delivering services
understand what the experience will feel like—and highlight where things might
go wrong.

For example, Norwegian energy company Haflsund was experiencing a high volume of
call-center inquiries. The company could have hired more customer service staff,
but it discovered that the source problem started well before the call center:
[30 percent of calls were from customers simply confused by their bill][7]. A
prototype helped shape and test a solution—and implementing it cost a lot less
than a staff increase.

Although not all clients are interested in breaking out of their own silos,
don’t let that stop you. The better you understand how the channel you are
designing for fits into a broader context, the better your design will be. You
might not be able to influence the other channels, but you can ensure you are
using the same language, and create smooth “on- and off-ramps” to your channel.

## Designing for change

Many organizations do know their customer experience is lousy, however. They
just don’t know how to go about fixing it.

Help them get out of their old industrial mindset by using the screenwriter’s
maxim. Show clients how other parts of their organization have an impact on what
they are trying to do, don’t just tell them about it. This might just be the
evidence they need to persuade others in their organization to change.

This isn’t only a job for designers, of course. Professionals in change
management are as essential to this as experienced designers are to a good
website. But our visual skills are powerful.

Many executives are more comfortable talking about business cases in Excel than
experiences, because numbers feel objective. What everybody really wants are
assurances that the project is not going to fail, either from the business side
or the design side. [Breaking away from the screen][8] with visual and tangible
artifacts that can be experienced and tested creates a bridge between the two.

[1]: http://www.uie.com/articles/three_hund_million_button/
[2]: http://www.polaine.com/2007/02/company-relationships-are-like-a-marriage/
[3]: http://www.servicedesigntools.org/tools/35
[4]: http://www.servicedesigntools.org/tools/8
[5]: http://www.servicedesigntools.org/tools/13
[6]: http://www.servicedesigntools.org/tools/24
[7]: http://liveworkstudio.com/client-cases/hafslund/
[8]: http://liveworkstudio.com/the-customer-blah/pilot-or-perish/

[Single-Channel Thinking]: img/multichannel1.jpg
[A Multichannel Experience]: img/multichannel2.jpg
[Many business are arranged in silos]: img/silos.jpg
[Services are ecologies]: img/cx_view.jpg
[Sequenced tabs make for slow going with the new Deutsche Bahn ticket machines]: img/bahn_ticket_machine_800.jpg